% The curse of spatial scale in population statistics and how GIS can help
% Antti Härkönen
% 2022-08-08

Ecological fallacy is a common statistical problem that arises from aggregation of data into larger units. When many local features are combined, they may create seemingly co-occurring phenomena. These can easily be interpreted as indicators of causal relationship.
One common subset of ecological fallacy is the modifiable areal unit problem (MAUP). This refers to the fact that areal units can and will change arbitrarily, which renders statistics incompatible. MAUP is a classic and well-known problem in the context of spatial sciences, but it is rarely discussed in historical studies. Quantitative studies of the past often require the use of administrative units as statistical units. Such comparisons across time and space are especially common in studies of demographical and economic history. The fact that administrative units differ from one another already creates several problems for the reliability. Not only can they change diachronically, but they can also have radically different sizes and shapes depending on country and various geographic factors. Historians tend to deal with these problems either by ignoring them or by excluding mutating areal units from their analyses.
More fine-grained spatial analysis reduces the effects of spatial scale, however. Typically, there are not enough ready-made data available, so solutions to such problems require vast amounts of work. Another approach used in Historical GIS research is to compensate for the changing boundaries by estimating the amount of population shifted in border chances by using spatial analysis techniques. I chose the former approach studying the spatial segregation of ethnic groups in Vyborg. I have been able to locate populations down to the level of cadaster plots, which has helped to avoid the problems of changing district boundaries.